Event history (#428)
wamp-proto/wamp-proto: rfc/text/advanced/ap_27_pubsub_event_history.md

## Event History {#pubsub-event-history}

> Instead of complex QoS for message delivery, a *Broker* may provide *message history*. A *Subscriber* is 

Reviewer: yes, that is actually one argument when looking at "event history" as an alternative to what QoS'ed PubSub provides. in my mind, the word "Instead" however suggests it's either/or .. while IMO there are arguments for both. As in: even when an implementation provides event history, QoS for PubSub might still make sense. And WAMP does have acknowledged PubSub (QoS-1) at least. And there is a proposal / exp. impl for `EVENT_RECEIVED`  https://github.com/crossbario/autobahn-python/blob/f77396401d52a5284c3506171cf45eb64505804f/autobahn/wamp/message.py#L3873 which would allow higher QoS levels. 

So IMO it would be great to add a bit more text for motivation, context/background and related features or feature proposals. I think it is crucial for a reader to have a good understanding of our original motivation and thinking.

Author: 👍🏻  Agree. I personally don't compare event history with QoS at all. MB I'll provide some other use cases.

responsible to handle overlaps (duplicates) when it wants "exactly-once" message processing across restarts.

The event history may be transient or persistent message history (surviving *Broker* restarts).

> The *Broker* implementation may allow for configuration on a per-topic basis.

Reviewer: "... allow for configuration of event history on a per-topic or on a per-topic pattern basis. Such configuration could enable/disable the feature, event history storage location and parameters such as compression, or the event history data retention policy."

Author: 👍🏻  Added!

To understand what actually event history means lets review the publication flow. When one peer decides to publish
a message to a topic it results in `Publication` WAMP message with concrete `publication_id`, `payload` and `options`
among other attributes. The *Broker* in his turn checks current subscriptions and create an `Event` WAMP message for

> every subscription. There can be no subscriptions, one exactly matched to publication topic subscription and zero or 

Reviewer: """
A given event received by the router from a publisher (a `PUBLISH` message) will lead to one or more matching subscriptions:
* zero or one exact subscription
* zero or more prefix subscriptions
* zero or more wildcard subscriptions

One and the same published event is dispatched and sent to every subscriber of all subscriptions matching. Thus, a given event might be sent multiple times to the same client under different subscriptions.
"""

Author: Added!

more pattern-based subscriptions. Every unique subscription (based on topic URI and options) has unique ID. All
subscribers of the same subscription get the same subscription ID.

{align="left"}
    TODO: Some scheme for pub/sub

> Event History means the events published to concrete subscription in historical order. Let's see an example.

Reviewer: "historical order (that is by broker receive time)"

Author: 👍🏻  added

        "args": [],              // The original list arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
        "kwargs": {}             // The original key-value arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
    }
  ]
```

In cases when the events set is pretty big to send it in a single result, router implementations
may provide additional options, like pagination or returning a progressive results. 

As Event History feature operates on `subscription|id` there can be situations when there is no subscribers to topic
of interest yet, but publications happens. In this case the *Broker* can not prematurely know what events to store.
If the *Broker* implementation allows configuration on per-topic basis, it may overcome this situations by 
preinitializing history-enabled topics with subscriptions even if there is no real subscribers yet exists.

Sometimes a client may not be interested in subscribing to a topic just to get a subscription id. In that case
a client may use some [Subscriptions Meta API RPC](#name-procedures-3) for retrieving subscription IDs by topic URIs
if WAMP router supports it.

**Security Aspects**

> To be able to request event history, peer must be allowed to subscribe to desired subscription first. Thus, if peer

Reviewer: This is a crucial element which needs more discussion, so we could at least mark this here in the text to be merged in another follow up PR once we have it.

IMO, there are 2 valid approaches to authorization:

1. consider if the peer is authorized to subscribe _now_, and if so, allow the peer to access the complete history - so make it, as if the client was subscribed ever since
2. consider if the peer was authorized to subscribe in the _past_, or generally filter all results to those periods in which the peer was indeed allowed to subscribe

both are sufficient for a peer to catch up with missed events, however, the latter is more restrictive

Author: Yeah, agree. Added a todo/fixme note.

return events including or excluding the matched one depending on the `*_publication` filter attributes.

The `arguments` payload field returned by the above RPC uses the same schema: an array of `Event` objects containing 
an additional timestamp attribute. It can also be an empty array in the case where there were no publications to the 
specified subscription, or all events were filtered out by the specified criteria. Some additional general information 
about the query are returned via the `argumentsKw` payload field.

{align="left"}
```javascript
  [
    {
        "timestamp": "yyyy-MM-ddThh:mm:ss.SSSZ", // sring with event date/time in RFC3339 format
        "subscription": 2342423, // The subscription ID of the event
        "publication": 32445235, // The original publication ID of the event
        "details": {},           // The original details of the event
        "args": [],              // The original list arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
        "kwargs": {}             // The original key-value arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
    }
  ]
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Clients should not rely on timestamps being unique and monotonic. When events occur in quick succession, it's possible for some of them to have the same timestamp. When a router in an IoT system is deployed off-grid and is not synchronized to an NTP server, it's possible for the timestamps to jump backwards when the router's wall clock time or time zone is manually adjusted.

```

2. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as event to subscriptions 2 and 3.
3. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as events to subscriptions 2 and 3.
4. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as events subscriptions 2 and 3.
5. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.checkout'. Delivered as an event to subscription 3 only.

Event History:

* Event history for subscription 1 contains publication 1 only.
* Event history for subscription 2 contains publications 2, 3, and 4.
* Event history for subscription 3 contains all publications.

**Feature Announcement**

A *Broker* that implements *event history* must indicate 
`HELLO.roles.broker.features.event_history = true`, must announce the role `HELLO.roles.callee`, 
and must provide the meta procedures described below.

**Receiving Event History**

A *Caller* can request message history by calling the *Broker* meta procedure

{align="left"}
        wamp.subscription.get_events

With payload:

* `Arguments` = `[subscription|id]`. The subscription id for which to retrieve event history
* `ArgumentsKw`:

>   * `reverse`. Boolean. Optional. Traverses events in from newest to oldest, instead of oldest to newest, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `reverse`. Boolean. Optional. Traverses events in reverse order of occurrence. 
```

>     which is default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The default is to traverse events in order of occurrence.
```

  * `limit`. Positive integer. Optional. Indicates the maximum number of events to retrieve. Can be used for pagination.
  * `from_time`. RFC3339-formatted timestamp string. Optional. Only include publications occurring at the 
    given RFC3339 timestamp or after (using `>=` comparison).
  * `after_time`. RFC3339-formatted timestamp string. Optional. Only include publications occurring after the 
    given RFC3339 timestamp (using `>` comparison).
  * `before_time`. RFC3339-formatted timestamp string. Optional. Only include publications occurring before the 
    given RFC3339 timestamp (using `<` comparison).
  * `until_time`. RFC3339-formatted timestamp string. Optional. Only include publications occurring before the 
    given RFC3339 timestamp including date itself (using `<=` comparison).
  * `topic`. WAMP URI. Optional. For pattern-based subscriptions only include publications to 
    specified topic.

>   * `from_publication`. Positive integer. Optional. The position after which to return results (using `>=` comparison). 

Author: Yeah, agree! Thnx!

    This corresponds to the `publication|id` attribute of the event.
  * `after_publication`. Positive integer. Optional. The position after which to return results (using `>` comparison). 
    This corresponds to the `publication|id` attribute of the event. Useful for pagination: pass the `publication|id` 
    attribute of the last event returned in the previous page of results when navigating from past to present.
  * `before_publication`. Positive integer. Optional. The position before which to return results (using `<` comparison). 
    This corresponds to the `publication|id` attribute of the event. Useful for pagination: pass the `publication|id` 

>     attribute of the first event returned in the previous page of results when navigating from present to past.

Reviewer 2: Note to KS: When `reverse = true`, one expects the events array to be sorted in reverse order or occurrence. Therefore it's the _last_ event in the previous page of results that must be given.

>     attribute of the first event returned in the previous page of results when navigating from present to past.

Author: yeah. Didn't fixed after the rethink. Thnx for catching!

## Event History {#pubsub-event-history}

Instead of complex QoS for message delivery, a *Broker* may provide *message history*. A *Subscriber* is 

> responsible to handle overlaps (duplicates) when it wants "exactly-once" message processing across restarts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
responsible for handling overlaps (duplicates) when it wants "exactly-once" message processing across restarts.
```

The event history may be transient or persistent message history (surviving *Broker* restarts).

The *Broker* implementation may allow for configuration of event history on a per-topic or on a per-topic 
pattern basis. Such configuration could enable/disable the feature, event history storage location and 
parameters such as compression, or the event history data retention policy.

> To understand what actually event history means lets review the publication flow. When one peer decides to publish

Author: I'll check again, but afaik there is no description of the flow with examples of a few different subscriptions type. That's why I added it. Maybe we should move this text/diagram to another place in the SPEC

a message to a topic it results in `Publication` WAMP message with concrete `publication_id`, `payload` and `options`
among other attributes. 

A given event received by the router from a publisher (a PUBLISH message) will lead to one or more 

> matching subscriptions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subscriptions:
```

Subscriptions:

1. Subscription to exact match 'com.mycompany.log.auth' topic
2. Subscription to exact match 'com.mycompany.log.basket' topic
3. Subscription to prefix-based 'com.mycompany.log' topic

Publication messages:

1. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.auth'. Delivered as event to 1st and 3rd subscriptions.
2. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as event to 2nd and 3rd subscriptions.
3. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as event to 2nd and 3rd subscriptions.
4. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.basket'. Delivered as event to 2nd and 3rd subscriptions.
5. Publication to topic 'com.mycompany.log.checkout'. Delivered as event to 3rd subscription only.

Event History:

* Event History for 1st subscription includes only 1st publication.
* Event History for 2nd subscription includes 2nd, 3rd, 4th publications.
* Event History for 3rd subscription includes all publications.

**Feature Announcement**

A *Broker* that implements *event history* must indicate 
`HELLO.roles.broker.features.event_history = true` and (also) announce role `HELLO.roles.callee`, 
and provide the builtin procedures described below.

> **Receiving Event History**

Author: 👍🏻

A *Caller* can request message history by calling the *Broker* procedure

{align="left"}
        wamp.event.history.last

with `Arguments = [subscription|id, limit|integer]` where

* `subscription` is the subscription id to retrieve event history for
* `limit` indicates the number of last N events to retrieve

or by calling

{align="left"}
        wamp.event.history.since

with `Arguments = [subscription|id, timestamp|string]` where

* `subscription` is the subscription id to retrieve event history for

> * `timestamp` indicates the UTC timestamp since when to retrieve the events in the ISO-8601 format `yyyy-MM-ddThh:mm:ss:SSSZ` (e.g. `"2013-12-21T13:43:11:000Z"`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `timestamp` is a RFC3339-formatted timestamp string, demarcating the UTC time from which to start retrieving the event history. The format is `yyyy-MM-ddThh:mm:ss.SSSZ` (e.g. `"2013-12-21T13:43:11.000Z"`).
```

> * `timestamp` indicates the UTC timestamp since when to retrieve the events in the ISO-8601 format `yyyy-MM-ddThh:mm:ss:SSSZ` (e.g. `"2013-12-21T13:43:11:000Z"`)

Author: Good catch!

        "subscription": 2342423, // The subscription ID of the event
        "publication": 32445235, // The original publication ID of the event
        "details": {},           // The original details of the event
        "args": [],              // The original list arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
        "kwargs": {}             // The original key-value arguments payload of the event. May be ommited
    }
  ]
```

In cases when the events set is pretty big to send it in a single result, router implementations
may provide additional options, like pagination or returning a progressive results. 

As Event History feature operates on `subscription|id` there can be situations when there is no subscribers to topic
of interest yet, but publications happens. In this case the *Broker* can not prematurely know what events to store.
If the *Broker* implementation allows configuration on per-topic basis, it may overcome this situations by 
preinitializing history-enabled topics with subscriptions even if there is no real subscribers yet exists.

Sometimes a client may not be interested in subscribing to a topic just to get a subscription id. In that case

> a client may use some [Subscriptions Meta API RPC](#name-procedures-3) for retrieving subscription IDs by topic URIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a client may use other [Subscriptions Meta API RPC](#name-procedures-3) for retrieving subscription IDs by topic URIs
```

Original publications may include additional options, like `black-white-listing` that enforces special event 
processing. The same rules must apply to event history requests. For example, if original publication has 
`eligible_authrole = 'admin'`, but request for history came from peer with `authrole = 'user'`, then even if 
`user` is authorized to subscribe to topic and thus is authorized to ask for event history, this publication 
must be filtered out from this concrete request results on the router side.

`black-white-listing` feature also allows to filter events delivery on `session ID` basis. In the context of
event history that can results in unexpected behaviour: `session ID` are generated randomly in runtime for every
session connection so newly connected sessions asking for event history may receive events originally excluded 
or vice versa may not receive expected events due to session ID mismatch. To prevent this unexpected behaviour
all events published with `Options.exclude|list[int]` or `Options.eligible|list[int]` should be ignored by event
history implementation, mean not saved at all.

> To wrap it up: event history may operate on rather stable session attributes, for now it is `authrole` and `authid`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, Event History should only filtered according to attributes that do not change during the run time of the router, which are currently `authrole` and `authid`.
```

> all dynamic attributes like `session ID` or maybe other custom attributes in future should lead to ignore storing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filtering based on ephemeral attributes like `session ID` – and perhaps other future custom attributes – should result in the event not being stored in the history at all, to avoid unintentional leaking of event information.
```

> such events by event history implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
